Improvements to BSR matmul in PyTorch (#781)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/consulting/posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch.md

---
title: "Improvements to BSR Matrix Multiplication in PyTorch"
published: October 1, 2023
author: andrew-james
description: 'Quansight engineers have implemented several new kernels for matrix multiplication
involving sparse and dense arguments. These implementations, available in PyTorch 2.1,  offer a
significant performance improvement over those available in previous versions of PyTorch. In
addition, they have the unique property that they are implemented using `triton`, however they are
not the product of `torch.compile`.'
category: [Open Source Software, PyTorch, Triton, GPU]
---
<base target="_blank" />

> Quansight engineers have implemented several new kernels for matrix multiplication involving sparse

Reviewer: @amjames @lezcano Are these sole contribs, or also team effort with Meta?

If all are one or the other, we'll be able to say it once at the top. Otherwise we'll want to be specific at each contrib.

(I haven't read anything yet, so you may have already done this.)

and dense arguments. These implementations, available in PyTorch 2.1,  offer a significant
performance improvement over those available in previous versions of PyTorch. In addition, they have

> the unique property that they are implemented using `triton`, however they are not the product of

Reviewer: What is triton? Why is it surprising that torch.compile is not involved?

Author: This part will come out of the intro, see below.

> `torch.compile`.

Author: I need to rewrite the tail of this intro. Originally I planned to go through some of the details of how we wired up the triton kernel so that it was dispatched to from the native functions for matmuls. 

Ended up with enough content and didn't feel it was a worthwhile addition, as the major technical hurdle was fighting with torch's init mechanisms to make sure we don't prematurely cause the cuda runtime to be initialized.

In this post, we will discuss the results of this work and how it can be used.

## Sparse Layouts in PyTorch

PyTorch implements a total of 5 sparse layouts. Each layout has properties which make it more, or
less, suitable for a particular task. As an example, the coordinate format ([COO][pytorch-docs-coo])
can be used to incrementally build sparse tensors, with features allowing for individual element
access and updates to be more efficient.  However for most mathematical operations 
[compressed layouts][pytorch-docs-compressed], like compressed sparse row 
([CSR][pytorch-docs-csr]), are a better choice since they store specified elements with a more
regular structure. This is what a PyTorch tensor looks like using the CSR layout

```python
>>> mat = torch.tensor([
    [0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0],
    [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
    [0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0],
    [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0],
    [1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0],
    [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0],
])
>>> mat.to_sparse_csr()
tensor(crow_indices=tensor([0, 1, 4, 5, 5, 8, 8]),
       col_indices=tensor([2, 0, 2, 4, 3, 0, 1, 4]),
       values=tensor([1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]),
       size=(6, 6),
       nnz=8,
       layout=torch.sparse_csr)
```

> This work is concerned with the block sparse row ([BSR][pytorch-docs-bsr]) layout, which is closely

Reviewer: What work? This comes out of nowhere.

related to the CSR layout except that blocks of values are stored. This affords many of the same
advantages as the CSR layout, with the additional feature that vectorized operations can be used to
operate on these value blocks. Reusing the example above with the BSR layout the similarities are
clear

```python
>>> mat.to_sparse_bsr((2, 2))
tensor(crow_indices=tensor([0, 3, 4, 6]),
       col_indices=tensor([0, 1, 2, 1, 0, 2]),
       values=tensor([[[0, 0],
                       [1, 0]],
                        ...
                      [[1, 0],
                       [0, 0]]]),
      size=(6, 6), nnz=6, layout=torch.sparse_bsr)
```

> There are some drawbacks to a block sparse layout, namely we must fully materialize a block if any

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are some drawbacks to a block sparse layout; a key disadvantage is that we must fully materialize a block if any
```

value within it is non-zero. Larger blocks are generally better for vectorized operations, but will
have more memory overhead.  The example we have used here demonstrates this well. In
[Figure-1][#fig-1] we have this matrix with non-zero values in yellow, and the 2x2 block size shown

> with the red grid. 

Reviewer: This will need reflow.

```suggestion
with the red grid. The large number of red blocks that contain mostly zero values illustrates this relatively poor memory efficiency of the layout.
```

<img src="posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch/blocksparse_2x2_matplot.png"
    name="fig-1"
    alt="A 6x6 grid of colored squares, zero and non-zero values indicated by color. Overlaid is a
    grid segregating the matrix into 9 2x2 blocks."
/>

## Matrix Multiplication with Sparse Tensors

In PyTorch, dense matrix multiplication in eager mode will usually forward to a high performance

> math library (i.e. cuBLAS) that implements the [`GEMM`][cublas-docs-gemm]. Once we start to involve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
math library (i.e. cuBLAS) that implements the [`GEMM`][cublas-docs-gemm] algorithm. Once we start to involve
```

> math library (i.e. cuBLAS) that implements the [`GEMM`][cublas-docs-gemm]. Once we start to involve

Reviewer: Yes, if there is more than one option here, "e.g." is best

> sparse tensors the situation becomes more complex. We must have a different `GEMM` like operation

Reviewer: Alternative edit

```suggestion
sparse tensors the situation becomes more complex. We must have a different `GEMM`-like operation
```

for every pattern of sparse/dense arguments we need to support. Here we will focus on two forms
involving exactly one sparse argument, we have

- `C(Dense) += A(Sparse) @ B(Dense)` or **DSD**
- `C(Sparse) += A(Dense) @ B(Dense)` or **SDD**

where `@` is used to represent the matrix multiplication operation.

The DSD pattern is an operation with the same semantics as a dense matrix multiplication. If the
sparse argument were converted to dense, or all implicit zeros were materialized the result should

> be equivalent. The DSD pattern can be used to compute linear layers with sparse weights. This is an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be equivalent. The DSD pattern can be used to compute linear layers with sparse weights. This is a
```

> function which is semantically equivalent to [`torch.nn.functional.linear`][pytorch-docs-linear]

Reviewer 2: Perhaps
```suggestion
function which is semantically equivalent to [`F.linear`][pytorch-docs-linear]
```

```python
def linear(x, W, b=None):

>     tmp = (W @ x.transpose(-2, -1)).transpose(-2, -1)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    tmp = (W @ x.mT).mT
```
Also, does linear return a transposed output?

Reviewer 2: On a second thought, I guess this is inherited from back in the days, where the matmul tiling algorithms may not have been as optimised as they are nowadays.

Author: Linear will return `x@W^T`, since the layout of `W` is BSR and it must be on the RHS so we compute `(W @ x^T)^T`. For dense tensors it is trivial to permute the arguments and different combinations of transposition flags will change the tiling strategy appropriately, but for sparse tensors this is not as straight forward, so APIs will usually fix which argument is carries the sparse layout. 

We are working on a kernel which will support linear in its "native" form allowing the sparse tensor to be on the LHS and carry BSC layout  which is what an expression like `x @ W^T` would boil down to as the transposition on the BSR tensor yields BSC with the same indices and transposed blocks. 

Your suggestion is still a good one as the entire post deals with 2-d arrays this is a more compact way to write the example.

Reviewer 2: note that `.mT` is exactly the same as `transpose(-2, -1)`. I think you were thinking of `.T`, which should just be used with 2-d tensors.

    if b is not None:
        return tmp + b
    else:
        return tmp
```

> In this case the weights, `W` can be stored using BSR layout, provided the DSD matrix multiply is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this case, the weights `W` can be stored using a BSR layout, provided the DSD matrix multiply is
```

> supported. Note that linear is defined by `x@W^T` and above we have calculated the transpose of this

Reviewer: Based on the above, I think:

```suggestion
supported. Note that `linear` is defined by `x@W^T` and above we have calculated the transpose of this
```

expression.

> In contrast the SDD pattern does is not semantically equivalent under conversion to dense layout. In

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In contrast, the SDD pattern is not semantically equivalent to the dense-to-dense `GEMM`. In
```

> this case the sparse tensor updated with the result of `A@B` also acts as a mask.  In other words

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
this case the sparse tensor updated with the result of `A@B` also acts as a mask.  In other words,
```

> `C` will have the same sparsity pattern and that pattern is imposed on the product `A@B`.  In

Reviewer 2: will have the same sparsity pattern than what?

Reviewer: Agree w/@lezcano

PyTorch, we call this operation [`torch.sparse.sampled_addmm`][pytorch-docs-sampled-addmm].  This

> operation is also relevant for transformer models.  It can be used to compute masked gradients for

Reviewer 2: We have not said anything else this op is relevant for, so "also" doesn't make much sense here.
```suggestion
operation is particularly relevant for transformer models.  It can be used to compute masked gradients for
```

> terms like `linear` where during training we want to ensure the sparsity pattern of `W` is preserved.

Reviewer 2: nit
```suggestion
terms like `linear` where during training we want to ensure that the sparsity pattern of `W` is preserved.
```

There exist BLAS-like libraries supporting sparse layouts, for example NVIDIA's
[cuSPARSE][cusparse-docs]. These options are lacking some important features that are needed to make

> it practical to use sparse layouts in machine learning applications. First, they typically perform

Reviewer 2: "to make it practical", and you just enumerate 1 library, but you refer in the rest of the paragraph to "these" and "they". Are there any other library we can cite here?

> poorly compared to dense matrix multiply except when the sparsity is very high (<10% of the elements

Reviewer: What kind of performance here? Memory usage, I would guess, and not speed? Both?

More generally, w.r.t. performance, if only one sense of performance is relevant throughout the post, it would streamline things to say at the top something like, 'all discussion of performance in this post refers to memory efficiency'.

(This might be obvious to experts, but it'd be a small thing that would increase accessibility for non-experts)

Author: This is actually an important point and if it is not clear we should revise to make it so. 

Sparse layouts reduce memory overhead essentially for free, once you implement the layout is offers a more compact representation for tensors with a large number of elements equal to zero (or that you can force to be equal to zero).

It is more difficult to operate on the data in this form so usually computational performance suffers until we reach such a high degree of sparsity (fraction of elements which are zero) that we are doing almost no work.

Our goal, with efforts like what I am discussing in this post, is to provide more efficient implementations of key operations so that you can take the reduced memory footprint without a loss in performance at at lower degree of sparsity.

Reviewer: Yeah, I remember some of this from conversations earlier this year over a post draft ... might even have been an earlier draft of this post?

I'll pay close attention to this as I work.

> poorly compared to dense matrix multiply except when the sparsity is very high (<10% of the elements
> are stored). Second, many of the operations are missing support for half precision data types, which

Reviewer 2: Is this equivalent? If so, it'd be cleaner.
```suggestion
poorly compared to dense matrix multiply except when the sparsity is very high (<10% of the elements
are zero). Second, many of the operations are missing support for half precision data types, which
```

Reviewer: I think yours is backwards, @lezcano -- 'stored' -> 'nonzero'.

Reviewer 2: Fair enough. I vote "specified" then.

is a feature used frequently in learning applications.

> In order to overcome the limitations, we have explored other options, specifically using the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to overcome the limitations, we have explored using the
```

[Triton][triton] compiler to author kernels. The `torch.compile` system introduced in PyTorch

> 2.0 uses Triton to generate GPU kernels. We now have prototype implementations for `DSD` and `SDD`

Reviewer: What is the connection between the first two sentences here? Did Quansight build the `torch.compile` system? Did QS uniformly use Triton via `torch.compile`?

I know there's a logical connection here, but it's not made in the text.

Author: The connection here is that `torch.compile` is the context within which most readers would be familiar with Triton, also the dependency on Triton introduced with `torch.compile` is the reason why it is available for us to use this way. 

QS made contributions to the `torch.compile` system, as well as the triton project, and we have used it for this work outside of the context of `torch.compile`.

> matrix multiplication using BSR layout available in PyTorch 2.1.

Reviewer: Available in which kernels?

Author: Implementation and kernel would be synonymous here. I discuss later where to access the APIs, and how one of these kernels is connected to several operators under particular conditions.

Reviewer: Hm. No, I mean... 

> We now have prototype implementations for `DSD` and `SDD` matrix multiplication using BSR layout available in PyTorch 2.1.

`DSD` and `SDD` are algorithms(?), right? And you talk about 'generat[ing] GPU kernels'.

For which kernels/implementations are the `DSD` and `SDD` algorithms now available? All GPUs?

Author: The "generation" of kernels is what `torch.compile` does, and for GPUs it will generate triton code. That detail is mentioned to connect triton to what the reader will most likely be familiar with the name from. 

In this case all the kernels are for GPU, triton only supports GPUs, for now. Specifically nvidia GPUs, although some AMD support will be available through the ROCm compatibility layer. I don't think it is necessary to spell all of that out.  We are stating that the kernels use the triton language, and all of our comparisons reference the cuSPARE, and cuBLAS implementations for sparse/dense baselines, so it should be clear that we are talking about GPU kernels.

## Benchmarks

We have evaluated the performance of new kernels. The performance is measured by speedup compared to

> the dense implementation. Where ever the functionality exists in both pytorch 2.1 and 2.0 we show

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the dense implementation. Whenever the functionality exists in both pytorch 2.1 and 2.0, we show
```

the metrics for both versions.  All experiments are performed using the `cuda` device type on a
system with a single NVIDIA A100-80G, and CUDA 11.8. 

### `sampled_addmm` (SDD)

> In the case of this operation a dense equivalent would involve the composition between matrix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the case of this operation, a dense equivalent would involve the composition between matrix
```

> multiplication and a masking operation.  Here, we have chose for the dense baseline a normal matrix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
multiplication and a masking operation.  Here, we have chosen for the dense baseline a normal matrix
```

> multiplication without masking. Since in practice the masking operation may not be used if sparse
> tensors are not also in use, for example when computing gradients. This gives us a harder target to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
multiplication without masking since, in practice, the masking operation may not be used if the inputs are not 
sparse, for example, when computing gradients. This gives us a harder target to
```

hit, but is a fair assessment. All matrices are square two with size 4096 in both dimensions, this
is a large subject, but sparsity is usually attractive in these cases as one of the features is a

> reduction in memory footprint.

Reviewer 2: This sentence reads a bit weird

axis) crosses the 1.0 threshold, which is marked with a horizontal line labeled "1x". At this point
the sparse operation executes more quickly than the dense baseline. This quantity tells us how much
do we need to be able to prune to use sparsity without our model executing more slowly. Looking at
the results for [`float32`][#fig-2] data type,

<img src="posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch/sampled_addmm_float32.png"
    name="fig-2"
    alt="A plot displaying sparsity ratio (as a percentage) on the horizontal axis, and speedup over
    the dense baseline on the vertical.  There is a horizontal line marking the speedup ratio of 1.0
    above which the sparse subject takes less time to execute than the dense counterpart.  Three lines are
    plotted indicating block sizes used for the sparse tensor of 16, 32, and 64."
/>

we see some promising results. Using block sizes of 32 and 64, we cross the 1x threshold below 70%
sparsity. Especially promising is that the smallest block size of 16 is able to reach 1x below 90%
sparsity. The small block size is important as it offers more flexibility in the pruning stage as

> non-zero values can be more dispersed usually resulting in a less accuracy loss.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
non-zero values can be more dispersed, usually resulting in a less accuracy loss.
```

> Moving on to [half precision data types][#fig-3] we see much poorer performance compared to dense.
> With the 1x threshold crossed only be the largest block size (64) and only a sparsity greater than

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Moving on to [half precision data types][#fig-3] we see much poorer performance compared to dense,
with the 1x threshold crossed only with the largest block size (64) and a sparsity greater than
```

> 90%. Requiring pruning to this degree is not practical, in most cases pruning to this level will

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
90%. Requiring pruning to this degree is not practical. In most cases, pruning to this level will
```

result in unacceptable drops in accuracy. 

<img src="posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch/sampled_addmm_half.png"
    name="fig-3"
    alt="A plot displaying sparsity ratio (as a percentage) on the horizontal axis, and speedup over
    the dense baseline on the vertical.  There is a horizontal line marking the speedup ratio of 1.0
    above which the sparse subject takes less time to execute than the dense counterpart.  Three lines are
    plotted indicating block sizes used for the sparse tensor of 16, 32, and 64."
/>

> We clearly have more work to do improve the performance of `sampled_addmm`, but our first pass still

Reviewer 2: Don't be so harsh on yourselves. Rewrite this in a more impersonal way. Something like "These results, albeit promising, show that there is still room for improvement"

have produced an excellent result. PyTorch users can start to experiment with the applications of
`sampled_addmm` in their code and using `float32` they have many options to explore without

> experiencing a performance penalty.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps remove the last sentence?

> **Note:** Although cuSPARSE has added better support for this operation with BSR layout in CUDA 12,

Reviewer 2: Tiniest of nits: Don't make the colon bold.

> that interface has not been enabled in PyTorch. This operation is supported for CSR layout by an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that interface has not been enabled in PyTorch. This operation is supported for the CSR layout by an
```

Also, what do you mean by "by an interface to cuSPARSE"?

interface to cuSPARSE.

### `bsr_dense_addmm` (DSD)

The DSD pattern has a direct translation to a dense matrix multiply, so here the experimental setup

> does not require as much explanation. However support for this type of sparse-dense matrix

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
does not require as much explanation. However, support for this type of sparse-dense matrix
```

multiplication already exists within PyTorch. In PyTorch 2.0 `BSR @ Dense` multiplication would

> forward to cuSPARSE for float32, and for half precision types a custom implementation was added
> which bridged the functionality gap using a composition of dense matrix multiplications. Here we

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
forward to cuSPARSE for float32, and to a custom implementation for half precision types. Here we
```

compare to both the dense baseline and these older implementations of the same operation.

Again, we will look at the performance for [`float32`][#fig-4] first.  The plot compares the new
triton-based implementation to the one available in older versions of PyTorch.  The triton backed

> kernels show significant improvements over the previous version. Speedup near 2x is observed at

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
kernels show significant improvements over the previous version. A speedup near 2x is observed at
```

> sparsity ratios near 50%. At high sparsity ratio it exceeds 6x. This is a leap forward in terms of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sparsity ratios near 50%. At high sparsity ratios, it exceeds 6x. This is a leap forward in terms of
```

raw sparse performance but we are primarily concerned with performance compared to the dense baseline
as this will determine if sparsity can be used without a performance penalty.

<img src="posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch/bsr_dense_mm_float32_vs_sparse.png"
    name="fig-4"
    alt="Two plots displaying sparsity ratio (as a percentage) on the horizontal axis, and speedup
    over the baseline on the vertical.  Three lines are plotted on both upper and lower plots
    indicating the block sizes used 16, 32, and 64."
/>

Comparison to the [dense baseline][#fig-5] is also very promising. Block sizes of 32 and 64 are
faster than dense for all sparsity ratios, and block size 16 crossing the 1x boundary at 70% sparsity.

> This also represents a leap forward in the usability of sparse tensors. 

Reviewer 2: you have used the expression "leap forward" in the previous paragraph. rewrite.

    above which the sparse subject takes less time to execute than the dense counterpart.  Three lines are
    plotted indicating block sizes used for the sparse tensor of 16, 32, and 64."
/>

Now we look at the performance for half precision data types. The new kernel provides between 20-50x
speedup over the [older sparse implementation][#fig-6]. While a speedup of this size is always a notable
result, we have known that the implementation supporting half precision data types would not be
optimal. However, as cuSPARSE did not support these data types a working implementation was created
by composing calls into the dense kernel for each sparse block. This approach suffers from a
significant penalty due to launching many CUDA kernels. 

<img src="posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch/bsr_dense_mm_half_vs_sparse.png"
    name="fig-6"
    alt="A plot displaying sparsity ratio (as a percentage) on the horizontal axis, and speedup over
    the older sparse implementation on the vertical.  Three lines are plotted indicating block sizes
    used for the sparse tensor of 16, 32, and 64."
/>

> Comparing performance for half precision to the [dense baseline][#fig-7] we again see one clear win.

Reviewer 2: "one clear win" or "a clear win"? I don't have the plots here, so I don't know which one is it.

> Using a block size of 64 the triton implementation begins to out perform the dense matrix multiply

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using a block size of 64, the triton implementation begins to outperform the dense matrix multiply
```

at 60% sparsity.  Unfortunately, this does not hold for smaller block sizes with 32 reach >1x
speedup at 90% sparsity, and block size 16 only passing this point at 99%. 

<img src="posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch/bsr_dense_mm_half_vs_dense.png"
    name="fig-7"
    alt="A plot displaying sparsity ratio (as a percentage) on the horizontal axis, and speedup over
    the older sparse implementation on the vertical.  There is a horizontal line marking the speedup
    ratio of 1.0 above which the sparse subject takes less time to execute than the dense
    counterpart.  Three lines are plotted indicating block sizes used for the sparse tensor of 16,
    32, and 64."
/>

## Try it out!

These kernels will be shipped with PyTorch 2.1. They can all be found in the
`torch.sparse._triton_ops` private submodule. Although not yet stable, the curious user may want

> experiment with these tools. If you want to stick to the public features only, the `bsr_dense_mm`

Reviewer 2: The title of this section is "try it out". Then it goes into discussing where to find these, and then comes back to the "try it out" topic. It'd be better to start noting that this is not stable, and then go onto discussing where can you find it.

kernel is also fully integrated with matrix multiply ops like `torch.mm` and  `torch.addmm`. 
If you meet the following conditions:

- The RHS of the matrix multiply or `A` in `A@B`, `torch.mm(A, B)`, or `torch.addmm(C, A, B)` has
  BSR layout, and other tensors are dense.
- The device type is `cuda`

> - The data type is `torch.float16`, or `torch.bfloat16`

Reviewer 2: Not for float32?

Author: We wanted to more thoroughly evaluate this kernel before enabling dispatch for `float32` which was available for a long time. The half precision data types were handled by some very poorly performing code that was new in PyTorch 2.0 so it was seen as a lower risk to route through here for those dtypes at first.

then the work will be forwarded to the triton kernel! It was an interesting process to set

> those bindings up, but that would deserve its own blog post. 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps avoid mentioning the bindings, as we are not discussing them at all.

## Conclusion

We have made some serious improvements to the usability of key features for BSR, but we are not
quite finished yet. These are only the first steps toward a larger goal, namely, making block sparse

> layouts a first class technique for accelerating transformer workflows. With PyTorch 2.1 coming out

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
layouts a first class technique for accelerating transformer workflows. With PyTorch 2.1 coming out,
```

it is a good time to take stock of where we are at, and we have come a long way, but there is plenty

> of work left to do. In the coming months we hope to improve on these kernels and add more. We also

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of work left to do. We hope to improve on these kernels and add more in the upcoming months. We also
```

> are working to enable pathways such that masking behavior for gradients can be accessed without

Reviewer 2: "We also are" or "We are also"?

Author: I think both ways are acceptable, but "We are also" reads better  will change it

less, suitable for a particular task. As an example, the coordinate format ([COO][pytorch-docs-coo])
can be used to incrementally build sparse tensors, with features allowing for individual element
access and updates to be more efficient. However for most mathematical operations [compressed
layouts][pytorch-docs-compressed], like compressed sparse row ([CSR][pytorch-docs-csr]), are a
better choice since they store specified elements with a more regular structure. This is what a
PyTorch tensor looks like using the CSR layout

```python
>>> mat = torch.tensor([
    [0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0],
    [1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0],
    [0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0],
    [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0],
    [1, 1, 0, 0, 1, 0],
    [0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0],
])
>>> mat.to_sparse_csr()
tensor(crow_indices=tensor([0, 1, 4, 5, 5, 8, 8]),
       col_indices=tensor([2, 0, 2, 4, 3, 0, 1, 4]),
       values=tensor([1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]),
       size=(6, 6),
       nnz=8,
       layout=torch.sparse_csr)
```

The block sparse row ([BSR][pytorch-docs-bsr]) layout is closely related to CSR, except that blocks
of values are stored. This affords many of the same advantages as the CSR layout, with the

> additional feature that we can use vectorized instructions inside kernels operating on the values

Reviewer 2: Missing full stop

> Reusing the example above with the BSR layout we can see the similarities are clear

Reviewer 2: nit. perhaps swap the order of the sentence: "We can see [...]"

```python
>>> mat.to_sparse_bsr((2, 2))
tensor(crow_indices=tensor([0, 3, 4, 6]),
       col_indices=tensor([0, 1, 2, 1, 0, 2]),
       values=tensor([[[0, 0],
                       [1, 0]],
                        ...
                      [[1, 0],
                       [0, 0]]]),
      size=(6, 6), nnz=6, layout=torch.sparse_bsr)
```

There are some drawbacks to a block sparse layout; a key disadvantage is that we must fully
materialize a block if any value within it is non-zero. Larger blocks are generally better for
vectorized operations, but may lead to more zero-valued elements being stored. The example we have

> used here demonstrates this well. In [Figure-1][#fig-1] we have this matrix with non-zero values in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
used here demonstrates this well. In [Figure-1][#fig-1], we have this matrix with non-zero values in
```

/>

## Matrix Multiplication with Sparse Tensors

In PyTorch, dense matrix multiplication in eager mode will usually forward to a high performance
math library (i.e. cuBLAS) that implements the [`GEMM`][cublas-docs-gemm] algorithm. Once we start
to involve sparse tensors the situation becomes more complex. We must have a different `GEMM`-like
operation for every pattern of sparse/dense arguments. Here we will focus on two forms involving
exactly one sparse argument:

- `C(Dense) += A(Sparse) @ B(Dense)` or **DSD**
- `C(Sparse) += A(Dense) @ B(Dense)` or **SDD**

where `@` is used to represent the matrix multiplication operation.

The DSD pattern is an operation with the same semantics as a dense matrix multiplication. If the
sparse argument were converted to dense, or all implicit zeros were materialized, the result should
be equivalent. The DSD pattern can be used to compute linear layers with sparse weights. This is a
function which is semantically equivalent to [`F.linear`][pytorch-docs-linear]

```python
def linear(x, W, b=None):
    tmp = (W @ x.mT).mT
    if b is not None:
        return tmp + b
    else:
        return tmp
```

> In this case, the weights `W` can be stored using a BSR layout, provided the DSD matrix multiply is
> supported. Note that `linear` is defined by `x@W^T` and above we have calculated the transpose of this

Reviewer 2: Perhaps
```suggestion
In this case, the weights `W` can be stored using a BSR layout.
Note that `linear` is defined by `x@W^T`, and above we have calculated the transpose of this
```

expression.

In contrast, the SDD pattern is not semantically equivalent to the dense-to-dense `GEMM`. In this

> case the sparse tensor updated with the result of `A@B` also acts as a mask. In other words, the `C`

Reviewer 2: Comma after in this case

will keep its sparsity pattern, and this will be imposed on `A@B`. In PyTorch, we call this
operation [`torch.sparse.sampled_addmm`][pytorch-docs-sampled-addmm]. This operation is particularly

> relevant for transformer models. It can be used to compute masked gradients for terms like `linear`

Reviewer 2: comma after linear

where during training we want to ensure that the sparsity pattern of `W` is preserved.

There exist BLAS-like libraries supporting sparse layouts, for example NVIDIA's
[cuSPARSE][cusparse-docs], and Intel's [MKL sparse API][mkl-docs-sparse-blas] . These options are
lacking some important features that are needed to make it practical to use sparse layouts in
machine learning applications. First, they typically perform poorly compared to dense matrix
multiply except when the sparsity is very high (\<10% of the elements are specified). Second, many
of the operations are missing support for half precision data types, which is a feature used
frequently in learning applications.

In order to overcome the limitations, we have explored using the [Triton][triton] compiler to author

> kernels. The `torch.compile` system introduced in PyTorch 2.0 uses Triton to generate GPU kernels.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps
```suggestion
kernels, similar to how `torch.compile` does.
```

We now have prototype implementations for `DSD` and `SDD` matrix multiplication using BSR layout
available in PyTorch 2.1.

## Benchmarks

We have evaluated the performance of new kernels. The performance is measured by speedup compared to
the dense implementation. Whenever the functionality exists in both pytorch 2.1 and 2.0, we show the

> metrics for both versions. All experiments are performed using the `cuda` device type on a system
> with a single NVIDIA A100-80G, and CUDA 11.8. We evaluated kernels using 2-dimensional tensors with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
metrics for both versions. All experiments are performed on a single NVIDIA A100-80G GPU, using CUDA 11.8. We evaluated kernels using 2-dimensional tensors with
```

shape `(n, n)` (n=4096) for all tensor arguments. We report performance at different Sparsity (%).
This metric describes the fraction of elements which are implicitly zero, so a tensor with 90%
sparsity contains only 10% of the values compared to a dense tensor with the same shape.

### `sampled_addmm` (SDD)

> In the case of this operation, a dense equivalent would involve the composition between matrix

Reviewer 2: what about
```suggestion
Strictly speaking, a dense equivalent would involve the composition between matrix
```

multiplication and a masking operation. Here, we have chosen for the dense baseline a normal matrix
multiplication without masking since, in practice, the masking operation may not be used if the
inputs are not sparse, for example, when computing gradients. This gives us a harder target to hit,
but is a fair assessment.

A key detail on these figures is the sparsity ratio (horizontal axis) where the speedup (vertical
axis) crosses the 1.0 threshold, which is marked with a horizontal line labeled "1x". At this point
the sparse operation executes more quickly than the dense baseline. This quantity tells us how much

> do we need to be able to prune to use sparsity without our model executing more slowly. Looking at

Reviewer 2: Remove double negation
```suggestion
we need to prune our weights to get a speed-up. Looking at
```

speedup over the [older sparse implementation][#fig-6]. While a speedup of this size is always a
notable result, we have known that the implementation supporting half precision data types would not
be optimal. However, as cuSPARSE did not support these data types a working implementation was
created by composing calls into the dense kernel for each sparse block. This approach suffers from a
significant penalty due to launching many CUDA kernels.

<img src="posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch/bsr_dense_mm_half_vs_sparse.png"
    name="fig-6"
    alt="A plot displaying sparsity ratio (as a percentage) on the horizontal axis, and speedup over
    the older sparse implementation on the vertical.  Three lines are plotted indicating block sizes
    used for the sparse tensor of 16, 32, and 64."
/>

Comparing performance for half precision to the [dense baseline][#fig-7] we see a clear win.
Using a block size of 64, the triton implementation begins to outperform the dense matrix multiply
at 60% sparsity. Unfortunately, this does not hold for smaller block sizes with 32 reach >1x
speedup above 80% sparsity, and block size 16 only passing this point above 90%.

> <img src="posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch/bsr_dense_mm_half_vs_dense.png"

Reviewer 3: Some general feedback about graphs.
1. Data points are generally preferable to jagged line graphs. This makes it clear where the measured data points are. It may also help with overlapping lines that currently make the data a bit hard to read.
2. Some of the speedup graphs are hard to read near 1x as the scale is so large. It may be better to have the largest sparsities go off the scale, or maybe even a log-y plot.
3. Since so much importance is given to the 1x speedup point, it would be good to annotate it on the graph for each line.

    name="fig-7"
    alt="A plot displaying sparsity ratio (as a percentage) on the horizontal axis, and speedup over
    the older sparse implementation on the vertical.  There is a horizontal line marking the speedup
    ratio of 1.0 above which the sparse subject takes less time to execute than the dense
    counterpart.  Three lines are plotted indicating block sizes used for the sparse tensor of 16,
    32, and 64."
/>

> We are encouraged by these results, but again there is more work to do. In particular, half

Reviewer 2: comma after again

- The RHS of the matrix multiply or `A` in `A@B`, `torch.mm(A, B)`, or `torch.addmm(C, A, B)` has
  BSR layout, and other tensors are dense.
- The device type is `cuda`
- The data type is `torch.float16`, or `torch.bfloat16`

then the work will be forwarded to the triton kernel!

## Conclusion

We have made some serious improvements to the usability of key features for BSR, but we are not
quite finished yet. These are only the first steps toward a larger goal, namely, making block sparse
layouts a first class technique for accelerating transformer workflows. With PyTorch 2.1 coming out,
it is a good time to take stock of where we are at, and we have come a long way, but there is plenty
of work left to do. We hope to improve on these kernels and add more in the upcoming months. We also
are working to enable pathways such that masking behavior for gradients can be accessed without
writing a custom autograd function or module.

This work would not have been possible without the close collaboration between Quansight, and Meta
within the PyTorch project. We thank Christian Puhrsch, Alban Desmaison, and Driss Guessous for

> their support and feedback during research and implementation, and their continued support moving

Reviewer 2: support is repeated.

category: [Open Source Software, PyTorch, Triton, GPU]
featuredImage:
  src: /posts/logos/pytorch_logo_large.png
  alt: 'The PyTorch logo, above the "PyTorch" project name in sans serif font. A stylized flame made from a single, thick orange line, with round bottom and single pointed top. There is a gap in the upper right of the line containing a circle with diameter equal to the line thickness.'
hero:
  imageSrc: /posts/hero-paris.webp
  imageAlt: 'Data visualization of Paris city'
---

<base target="_blank" />

Quansight engineers have implemented several new kernels for matrix multiplication involving sparse
and dense arguments. These implementations, available in PyTorch 2.1, offer a significant
performance improvement over those available in previous versions of PyTorch.

In this post, we will discuss the results of this work and how it can be used.

## Sparse Layouts in PyTorch

PyTorch implements a total of 5 sparse layouts. Each layout has properties which make it more, or
less, suitable for a particular task. As an example, the coordinate format ([COO][pytorch-docs-coo])
can be used to incrementally build sparse tensors, with features allowing for individual element

> access and updates to be more efficient. However for most mathematical operations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
access and updates to be more efficient. However, for most mathematical operations
```

       values=tensor([[[0, 0],
                       [1, 0]],
                        ...
                      [[1, 0],
                       [0, 0]]]),
      size=(6, 6), nnz=6, layout=torch.sparse_bsr)
```

There are some drawbacks to a block sparse layout; a key disadvantage is that we must fully
materialize a block if any value within it is non-zero. Larger blocks are generally better for
vectorized operations, but may lead to more zero-valued elements being stored. The example we have
used here demonstrates this well. In [Figure-1][#fig-1], we have this matrix with non-zero values in
yellow, and the 2x2 block size shown with the red grid. The large number of red blocks that contain
mostly zero values illustrates BSR is less memory efficient for this matrix.

<img src="/posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch/blocksparse_2x2_matplot.png"
    name="fig-1"
    alt="A 6x6 grid of colored squares, zero and non-zero values indicated by color. Overlaid is a
    grid segregating the matrix into 9 2x2 blocks."
/>

## Matrix Multiplication with Sparse Tensors

In PyTorch, dense matrix multiplication in eager mode will usually forward to a high performance

> math library (i.e. cuBLAS) that implements the general matrix multiply or
> ([`GEMM`][cublas-docs-gemm]) interface. Once we start to involve sparse tensors the situation

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
math library (i.e. cuBLAS) that implements the general matrix multiply (or
[`GEMM`][cublas-docs-gemm]) interface. Once we start to involve sparse tensors the situation
```

sparse argument were converted to dense, or all implicit zeros were materialized, the result should
be equivalent. The DSD pattern can be used to compute linear layers with sparse weights. This is a
function which is semantically equivalent to [`F.linear`][pytorch-docs-linear]

```python
def linear(x, W, b=None):
    tmp = (W @ x.mT).mT
    if b is not None:
        return tmp + b
    else:
        return tmp
```

In this case, the weights `W` can be stored using a BSR layout, making this a DSD matrix multiply.
Note that `linear` is defined by `x@W^T` and above we have calculated the transpose of this
expression.

In contrast, the SDD pattern is not semantically equivalent to the dense-to-dense `GEMM`. In this
case, the sparse tensor updated with the result of `A@B` also acts as a mask. In other words, `C`
will keep its sparsity pattern, and this will be imposed on `A@B`. In PyTorch, we call this
operation [`torch.sparse.sampled_addmm`][pytorch-docs-sampled-addmm]. This operation is particularly
relevant for transformer models. It can be used to compute masked gradients for terms like `linear`,

> where we want to ensure that the sparsity apttern of `W` is preserved during training.

Reviewer 3: typo
```suggestion
where we want to ensure that the sparsity pattern of `W` is preserved during training.
```

multiplication without masking since, in practice, the masking operation may not be used if the
inputs are not sparse, for example, when computing gradients. This gives us a harder target to hit,
but is a fair assessment.

A key detail on these figures is the sparsity ratio (horizontal axis) where the speedup (vertical
axis) crosses the 1.0 threshold, which is marked with a horizontal line labeled "1x". At this point
the sparse operation executes faster than the dense baseline. This quantity tells us how much
we need to prune to use sparsity without regressing performance. Looking at the results for
[`float32`][#fig-2] data type,

<img src="/posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch/sampled_addmm_float32_vs_dense.png"
    name="fig-2"
    alt="A plot displaying sparsity ratio (as a percentage) on the horizontal axis, and speedup over
    the dense baseline on the vertical.  There is a horizontal line marking the speedup ratio of 1.0
    above which the sparse subject takes less time to execute than the dense counterpart.  Three lines are
    plotted indicating block sizes used for the sparse tensor of 16, 32, and 64."
/>

> we see some promising results. Using block sizes of 32 and 64, we cross the 1x threshold at 80%

Reviewer 2: consider moving this "we see some[...]" to the previous paragraph.

sparsity. However, the smallest block size of 16 requires 90% sparsity to pass 1x. The small
block size is important as it offers more flexibility in the pruning stage as non-zero values can be
more dispersed, usually resulting in less accuracy loss.

Moving on to [half precision data types][#fig-3], we see much poorer performance compared to dense,
with the 1x threshold crossed only at 99% sparsity, and only for block size 32 and 64. Requiring
pruning to this degree is not practical. In most cases, pruning to this level will result in
unacceptable drops in accuracy.

<img src="/posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch/sampled_addmm_half_vs_dense.png"
    name="fig-3"
    alt="A plot displaying sparsity ratio (as a percentage) on the horizontal axis, and speedup over
    the dense baseline on the vertical.  There is a horizontal line marking the speedup ratio of 1.0
    above which the sparse subject takes less time to execute than the dense counterpart.  Three lines are
    plotted indicating block sizes used for the sparse tensor of 16, 32, and 64."
/>

> These results, albeit promising show there is still room for improvement. Support for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These results, albeit promising, show there is still room for improvement. Support for
```

`sampled_addmm` is a new feature for BSR layout, and we will continue to improve as we work to make
sparsity a practical technique for transformer acceleration.

**Note**: Although cuSPARSE has added better support for this operation with BSR layout in CUDA 12,
we do not expose that interface in PyTorch yet.

### `bsr_dense_addmm` (DSD)

The DSD pattern has a direct translation to a dense matrix multiply, so here the experimental setup
does not require as much explanation. However, support for this type of sparse-dense matrix
multiplication already exists within PyTorch. In PyTorch 2.0 `BSR @ Dense` multiplication would
forward to cuSPARSE for float32, and to a custom implementation for half precision types. Here we

> compare to both the dense baseline and these older implementations of the same operation.

Reviewer 2: Google flagged this "compare to both". If I change it to "compare against both" it likes it.
idk

Again, we will look at the performance for [`float32`][#fig-4] first. The plot compares the new
triton-based implementation to the one available in older versions of PyTorch. The triton backed
kernels show significant improvements over the previous version. Speedup is fairly constant across
sparsity levels at approximately 1.75x, 4.0x, and 4.75x for block size 16, 32, and 64 respectively.

> There is sharp rise in the relative performance at very high sparsity. This is a leap forward in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a sharp rise in the relative performance at very high sparsity. This is a leap forward in
```

terms of raw sparse performance, but we are primarily concerned with performance compared to the
dense baseline as this will determine if sparsity can be used without a performance penalty.

<img src="/posts/improvements-to-bsr-matrix-multiplication-in-pytorch/bsr_dense_mm_float32_vs_sparse.png"
    name="fig-4"
    alt="Two plots displaying sparsity ratio (as a percentage) on the horizontal axis, and speedup
    over the baseline on the vertical.  Three lines are plotted on both upper and lower plots
    indicating the block sizes used 16, 32, and 64."
/>

Comparison to the [dense baseline][#fig-5] is also very promising. Block sizes of 32 and 64 are

> faster than dense for almost all sparsity ratios, and block size 16 crossing the 1x boundary at 70%

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
faster than dense for almost all sparsity ratios, and block size 16 crosses the 1x boundary at 70%
```
